---
layout: post
title:  "2014 in Review - The Year of Grace"
date:   2014-12-31 09:22:24 -0900
categories: old review
---


The monthly habits I had in mind were either unappropriated (write daily) or pseudo-habits (say no to things not on my shortlist). I abandoned the Slow Carb diet within the first month. There was little-to-no reason for me to write daily, despite my impending depression (S.A.D.) and anxieties of being alone and on my own in Sweden for the first time. Upon reflection, it makes sense now that I chose a single project for myself, made in 60 minutes: a painting a day as gratitude. In all, it has done more for my development than each of those habitual changes could have––shaving every morning? Really? I stopped shaving in March and had a kingly full beard by the summer. Things don’t always go as planned.

The painting project has revealed a lot of my character, however. As far as the Year of Grace is concerned, I managed to make it to 50% (180) before missing a single day. And then, understandably when school began, I missed a day, and then once the first crack showed, the dam broke. I’ve fallen behind nearly two full months. I should be at 325/365 (89%) today, and am instead at 252/365 (70%). It harkens back to my days in high school, when by talent and charm I would win the affection of my teachers. In the end, I would still pass the classes with a B. In part, I think I have resented this in my life because in some way I consider it a blemish, and maybe even a barnacle attached to the hull of my boat that I can blame for my sluggishness. It’s because I get away with letting myself slack off that I continue to do so. In that sense, I should give myself a little more grace now for being human––but less grace at the time when choosing to let things slide.

This reminds me of a conversation I had with my brother one summer night when I was home in Colorado. He had recently ended his relationship with Amanda. It ended because he discovered that it was more about himself than it ever was about her. She told him as much. From that, his reflection was that he loved himself in the worst ways and hated himself in the worst ways. Self-worship permeated most encounters with others, and when things eventually shone light on that ugliness, self-loathing took its place. The paradox to being self-absorbed was he had no room to love himself. I echoed his feeling, it was something I had experienced most of my life. And it manifested in work as well, not just relationships. I hold myself to a high standard––as I should––and inevitably I would come up against an obstacle threatening to steal my chance at achievement. When the threat was nigh, I would give myself a pass, knowing I could manage just as fine without pushing my hardest, and no one would blame me for it. And so by relaxing, I would miss my mark. And then, when it came time to make up for it in the final hours, I would beat myself up for slacking––but too late!

Grace is to persevere under pressure, and to forgive with love in the end; certainly not the other way around. That is what I have learned. Not the first time––and perhaps not the last. Luck has it I still have a month remaining in my Made In 60 Minutes project to do my best.

This too, reminds me of something I’ve heard before: “the way you do one thing is the way you do everything.” In each decision to persevere just a moment more for the promise of that golden prize builds up strength and resolve in every other unfolding of character.

At the close of the year, I was graced the beautiful opportunity to talk with my best friend Josh. As always, he received my sincerity and doubt with clarity and love. In the past few years, our discussions have been dominated by conversations of God by proxy of relationships. I expect this is typically common for people about marrying age.

This time, I made a few observations as he shared his insights. Firstly, I noticed he has kept a keen memory of what’s been going on in my life. This revealed to me the sad thought I might be too self-centered to really listen to what is happening in his life. While I try, there is a large enough barrier called Daniel’s Own Problems to block my care and attention for my friend. As it is now, I would have trouble recalling what he is doing beyond waiting to hear back from hospitals for residency (I don’t know when he expects to hear back…March maybe?); I doubt I know how he and his wife Bethany are doing besides going to the Virgin Islands over New Year’s (that’s hardly how they are doing, at all). Anyway, that was my first observation.

My second observation was a short phrase that caught my ear. He said something about “misplaced love,” as we discussed my dilemma of faith. For being the Year of Grace, I have been rather unfaithful on the whole. I spent the summer reading King’s Cross by Tim Keller with Kevin, learning more about Christ and his struggle to save me, Daniel, specifically. While I went through it, the relationship between Kevin and I grew––which in retrospect was the reason I did it––and I recall very little of what I learned about the man Jesus Christ. I then chose to buttress my leaky mind by reading The Gospel of Luke, a passage-by-passage analysis of the book of Luke by William Barclay. It satiated my intellectual hunger, and quenched my spiritual thirst…in the beginning. This was especially easy when loneliness and boredom held most of my life, but the book was conveniently forgotten when basal desires broke the surface. My first tastes of respite came as an oasis with Dala Floda Gänget (the Dala Floda Gang) when staying at my mormor’s house over the summer. The indulgence was uncontrolled, but I didn’t think much about it. In August, I gulped social affection at Hyper Island, I sought sexual gratification from Tinder. Being socially and emotionally alone for almost a year, I hoarded my fill and more. (How remarkable Thoreau was to do it for so long!) Sara came into my life just when I longed for comfort and escape. She has been that for me: sweet and kind, motherly in her comfort, and loving in her care. I feel at home with her the way a child feels safe in a parent’s arms. She is good to me. We are so comfortable together. In November, I asked her to be my girlfriend. I have enjoyed every day of it since. Most days together, we would spend resting from our studies, watching Modern Family or Cosmos together, reveling in equal parts an absurdity of Phil Dunphy (to whom I bear striking similarity) or some marvel of Niel DeGrasse Tyson’s tales of the universe.

By this time, which I would say is mid-December, I had abandoned my stable summer habits. I stopped reading The Gospel of Luke. I stopped painting most mornings. Of course, this is no fault of Sara––and I have told her so many times––because I have been thrilled to invest my time and energy into her. I love spending time with her, and every time she enters the room I light up. I am so happy around her, all I want to do is be with her. But it does require more economy and intention from my end to make up for that time spent.

Inescapably, talking with Josh revealed a schism within me. This is the dilemma of faith I mentioned earlier, a conversation of God by relationship as proxy. Am I wholly certain enough in my faith to claim Christ as Lord and Savior before more than just Christian company? Possibly. Could I make the claim with conviction in front of Sara? No. Why not? If it is because I don’t wholly believe it, then why do I masquerade as though I do? Instead of being a personal relationship and an integrity of values, it is cheapened to a label with all its associated benefits. It is just a membership card. And then? The rift of a double-life takes root. No one can sustain that.

Do I claim Christ firmly and sincerely, to abandon the comforts and riches of life in order to take the harder path and live by those virtues? Or do I deny Christian structure as many secular people have because of its archaic commandments, uncompromising positions, and culture of guilt; in order to choose freely what I wish and create my own way? Is there a middle way?

Biblically speaking, there is no middle path. He who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven and tossed by the wind…he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways. (James 1:6, 8) And secularly speaking as well, society frowns on indecision. Hypocrisy is innately detested. Flip-flopping is cowardly in all cultures. So the decision must be made one way or another…and as usual, the hardest things must be put on the altar.

Josh also lent me The Great Divorce by CS Lewis. In it, Lewis describes Hell (a state of mind): it is smaller than a speck of dust in a crack, caught in the half-light of perpetual evening, where everyone is lonely, a million miles apart from one another searching for a corner to make their own way. There, every person seems so real, until coming up through the crack into the glade at the foothills leading into Heaven, where the evening shades are nothing more than ghosts in the almost-morning light. And here, so many get so close to heaven just to writhe and cry and turn back down the hole. “Better to be a king in Hell…” as Milton says (I paraphrase). For those who make the choice of Heaven, it hurts at first, of course (Reality is quite hard, apparently) but gets easier as you go on.

I am grateful Josh lent me the book. I see a lot of myself in its characters, which makes me hopeful and sad at different times when reading. Its purpose from CS Lewis is to push the question: You can choose the Reality of Heaven or the state of mind called Hell. What is your choice, reader? That is also Josh’s intent. And I can dodge and fiddlefart around that point as much as I like, but the question remains plain as daylight.

What then, is my choice in my faith?
