---
layout: post
title:  "Humor"
date:   2016-02-19 09:20:23 -0800
categories: philosophy
---

Humor is a great medicine because it takes something apparently true and gives it a spin, and makes it a bit fun.

In Made to Stick, there is an acronym the authors Chip and Dan Heath (?) use to explain the elements of what makes up "ideas that stick" compared to ideas that slide off faster than a slice of wet ham on sandwich with sweaty cheese. Here's the breakdown of principles:

Simple
Unexpected
Concrete
Credible
Emotional
Stories

The acrostic here is SUCCESs, which is convenient, because if it were FAILURE it sure wouldn't inspire much confidence. The assertion is that any sticky and memorable tagline, jingle, sales pitch, advertisement…really any idea that hopes to spread must be sticky enough to stay put in a bunch of people's minds. Humor has a wonderful way of achieving this—which is why so many advertisements use it.

I'm not a psychologist, and definitely not a neurologist, but since I've read some (one) books on the topic, I get to (pretend to) be an expert for a minute. Here's why it works so well. There is a schema, or a pattern that you and I recognize as "the way things are." The schema is heavily influenced by culture, which is partly the reason culture has such a big influence on what we find funny. We use these schema every day as shortcuts to understand how to navigate the world safely. We forget them because of how obvious and normal they are. They're just everyday life. Humor unexpectedly takes this accepted schema and it breaks it for a split second, and bang! We get surprised. Something we thought was obvious, part of our patterns of thinking about the world, just got upturned. Our brains don't like it when its patterns break. Broken patters are not particularly good for survival. Just try to use a computer that's constantly changing the way it works. Unless you're a particularly masochistic person, you probably wouldn't use it very long.  

Like computers, our brains work best when they're right about things it's already figured out. They don't like being wrong. So the brain quickly scrambles to fix the pattern that got broken. If there is a trick or a pun, which many jokes usually are either a tiny or verbose version of pun, then the brain finds the connection to fix the schema. The brain is rushed with endorphins for successfully patching the broken pattern, and the realization brings a clearer picture of the world, and so long as we realize we are actually safer and better off now that our schema is fixed, we get a double dose of endorphins. After figuring out "the truth", for some reason, (probably because we are drunk off all the serotonin swimming in our skulls) we laugh.

I guess the truth hurts, but at least it can be pretty funny in the right hands.

So how can you, or I, or anyone become funnier? (Anyone who's heard me try to deliver a punchline without cracking myself up knows I could use some pointers) Well my good friend Gustav used the Google to find a brilliant little WikiHow article on how to accomplish just that. Anything you want to learn you can find online, by the way. Literally anything. If you didn't know that, maybe you should turn off Fox News.

Here's the prescription for being wittier, which is a form of humor, in six steps plus one of my own.

- Learn from witty people. (They will behave witty. Watch and learn.)
- Be confident. (Confidence sells.)
- Be an original thinker. (Or be exceptionally good at stealing lines.)
- Understand your audience. (You have to know what their schema are)
- Have the right delivery. (Buildup and punchlines are all about how you say them.)
- Don't overdo it. (Too much is too much. Too little and you're just not witty.)

And my plus one is this: practice. Go out and try and see what sticks and what slides. If people laugh, that's usually a pretty good sign. I'm sure there are a lot of ways to be funny, and it would really be great to get to know all of them.

Today, I'm grateful for humor. I hope you are too.
