---
layout: post
title:  "What is really happening?"
date:   2016-03-05 15:31:24 +0100
categories: relationships
---

To see clearly, we need clear eyesight. But how do we get clear eyesight? So many times I feel blurry-eyed, but I want to see clearly because I want to help others. What's the point in seeing clearly if you can't help others with things you can see that they cannot? But worse, it is totally ridiculous to try helping others when you can't see! It's like trying to fix bugs in an app or website without knowing any code. You can't do it by yourself unless you have the knowledge to see what's happening.

In order to notice what is really happening, first we have to get help from others to see ourselves. We need feedback as humans. It is how we learn and get better as individuals, as a group, as tribes, and as a species. Today, more than ever because of technology, it is possible to get both *as much* and *as little* feedback as ever. But still we need feedback all the same. Feedback helps us see ourselves, it builds our confidence, helps us adjust our thinking, and shows us our blind spots. With feedback we get to know better our own humor, wisdom, and weirdness and it washes away our ignorance with understanding and neuroses with sharing.

When I ask a friend to help me see myself, I trust them to be honest and open and giving. I can only expect that if I am honest and open and giving in return. This virtuous cycle helps us see each other better, and when we see ourselves and each other with clearer vision, we have the chance to improve our skills, which grow even more the more selfless we become.

There are costs to not seeing each other. It is possible for a feedback loop to become a holding pattern that goes nowhere, or to become a vicious cycle that spirals downward. In both cases, the ability to notice what is really happening gets clouded by personal stresses and isolated perspectives. We don't thrive when we don't share. Unclear feedback patterns cloud our natural ability to see clearly and make sense of the world.

I'll share a story about this effect. When I first began at my internship, I felt pressure and discomfort in the office. I perceived a palpable tension between people there, and my insecurity met little to no welcoming or care-taking. I felt socially lost and insecure in my position. At the time, my sensitivity to inclusiveness was at an all-time high, since I had just finished a week at a teamwork retreat called UGL—a Swedish training course whose format is incidentally the foundation for Hyper Island's orientation week. (UGL roughly translates to Understanding Groups and Leadership.) There was a high degree of what groups-specialist Susan Wheelan identifies as "Stage one" behavior. Stage one behavior is typified when a person seeks out personal safety and inclusion in the group they are joining. If everyone is new to thr group, they will first sort out their needs for social safety with high dependence and identification with the leadership. Until a person's social safety is settled, they will wrestle with internal and external stresses in order to carve out safe-enough spaces to feel safe, productive, and appreciated by the group. It is basic social survival, and everyone does it every time they are new.

When I first arrived I was surprised to see a lot of this survival-type behavior. Despite how kind and friendly everyone was one-on-one, rarely would they look each other in the eye in a group setting. People rarely spoke up after the boss spoke, and little space was made to invite input. I felt compelled to do something about it, but not knowing what to do, I kept my head down for a month. My own self-preservation and desire to find a way to find belonging in the group (my "stage one" behavior), kept me from making a ruckus from the start.

In an operating room, a body receiving a blood transfusion has to get a matching blood type in order to have a successful transfusion. Otherwise, the host will reject blood that doesn't match, which would cause a lot of damage to the body that needed the blood in the process. Even though I clearly saw counter-productive group behaviors, I decided I would first fit in so I could help be a part of the change.

This had two effects. On one hand, with the help of my friend Bea and some patience I got the chance to design a workshop for the management team to help them become a tighter group. Using methods from Hyper Island and UGL, they gave one another feedback designed to strengthen their social and professional bonds, with me facilitating the process. At Hyper Island we call this meeting a TDS (Team Development Session). Since then, the general atmosphere in the office appears more friendly and attentive to newcomers, kind towards strangers, and collaborative in work.

On the other hand, in the time it has taken for me to feel like I "fit in" enough to affect the change I hope to, I witnessed myself adopting a lot of the behaviors that unnerved me when I first arrived. I spend much less energy concerned about others. When people look at me, I look away. I've started interrupting people in order to be heard. I am less aware of excluding people with my body language. I ignore people so I can focus on my work. These are changes I am unsatisfied with and I am prepared to revert.

This is where my vision has become clouded for lack of clear feedback. How accurate is my perception that the office is improving? Is it tainted by my subjectivity by feeling like I belong now as a natural peer? A frog has no awareness when boiled slowly. By the time the frog realizes the danger it's in, it's already cooked! This is a fear of mine.

So, the only option is to leap. Once you're in, you're in. Take the leap with courage to make a change and improve relationships with generosity, care, and honesty. The way forward is to make space for tensions to voice themselves and find alignment. Include everyone. Take on dares. Stand behind convictions. Listen well. Give and receive the feedback that brings clarity. Reach out and ask, and at the same time reach out and help.

Being able to notice what's really happening depends on sensitivity. Sensitive people notice things. Insensitive people do not. People in poor physical shape do not feel worse when they stay on the couch all week. People with unhealthy diets feel no worse after eating greasy food. So the key is to first get healthy, or sensitive, yourself in order to know how to help others shape up.

<!-- It is interesting how most realizations I have bring me back to first principles on the spiritual plane. Remember the golden rule, the Sermon on the Mount, and Christ's admonition on removing the speck from another's eye? The blind cannot lead the blind. There are few basics, but it's the basics that build a simple, successful (and scalable) life.
-->
